So we'll welcome Chris onto our
stream.
And members, just ahead of that, if we can be really succinct with our questions,
because I'm sure we'll have plenty,
that would be really appreciated.
Chris, we can see you there now. If you want to turn your camera
on, it's always
helpful for us to be able to see
you.
Thank you so much for being able to join us.
Welcome.
We have 15 minutes with you, and so we've just reminded the committee
about our succinct questions. Hopefully, you've got
time in there for us for questions because we will have some.
Yes.
I'll hand to you now.
Thank you very much. It's very pleasing to be joining you.
And I'm very pleased to know that New Zealand is moving so quickly
on this issue. I don't really have a large
opening statement because I thought I'd better use the time to talk about what you
want to talk about, and you've probably received our submission.
But I just wanted to, I suppose, make the point that it's very good
timing because I think the whole international regulatory framework
is moving quite quickly in this space.
And it's also been a bit weaponized in the
trade arguments around the world as well now.
So I think it's another argument for New
Zealand
moving towards
some form of business disclosure because forced labor
and labor rights are going to be a key part of all those debates.
So I guess I'll probably leave it there and see what particular
interests the committee has in exploring.
Thank you.
No doubt Greg's already off his microphone,
so wonder if you're wanting to go first, Greg, and we'll go to you, and then
we'll go to Camilla after that.
Oh, thank you very much. And thank you very much, Christopher,
for making the time to speak with us now and for the written submission.
Can I just jump-- The two areas I'm keen to explore with you about is in terms
of Australia's movement towards due diligence and get a view from
you as to what you think that the legislative and political process
is from here to those changes in Australia.
And then secondly, keen to get your thoughts around
director liability, which is something that Australia
doesn't have, but that is in our proposed bill.
No, look, thanks for that. I think
the reality is Australia's been debating moving to due diligence for
a while. The government's indicated a willingness to consider
it.
We had a change of minister in the portfolio about a year ago, and I think the new
minister's sort of coming to terms with some of those issues.
But
I think it's fair to say it's expected by business and
civil society that we'll move to due diligence.
The pace of that and when we actually make the move is still
in the melting pot a bit. But I think there's no question we'll
move to due diligence. It's becoming, if you like, the established standard around
the world and business in Australia, and many of them are arguing
for it. And others are kind of just
accepting that this is going to happen and
starting to sort of master what it'll require
of them.
In terms of director liability, we haven't gone down that path.
It hasn't been a big part of the debate in Australia in recent times.
So, it's hard to get a sense of the view about it.
I'm sure business wouldn't be
jumping for joy with it.
But as you've seen, there's been some important decisions in the UK
about this that I think is again starting to change standards.
But I think it's fair to say it's not a big part of the debate here.
I don't think we've got anything particular to offer you in regards to that
debate,
other than if you like, people have got their standard positions on those sorts of
issues.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. Okay. Thank you. I mean, yeah, I'll just go-
I'm sure you'll have more questions.
We'll go to Camilla, and then we'll come back to you, Greg.
Yeah, thanks so much for joining us, Chris, and thanks for being open to
discussing the work that you do. Just to start with, I had really
two questions. We've had a few submissions talk about how the
value of reporting should be measured
in the change that it makes to people's lives or in stopping
this type of worker exploitation at an extreme level that is covered by modern
slavery. And I just wanted to know, obviously, Australia's looking at
changes, but
if you could just touch on the value
of reporting in terms of changing
practices and where that might be going in the future.
And the second issue
was raised in one of our earlier submissions today where we heard
about how New South Wales had a parliamentary
modern slavery committee and the work that that committee had
done, and so I just wanted to see if you had any reflections on the value of
that type of committee when we're looking at
potential amendments to our bill. So thanks again.
Yeah.
Look, I think it's interesting, we had a business human rights seminar
recently,
last week, run by Responsible Business, and I had a chat to a large
multinational originally based in the US, and
I was quite surprised because I thought their standard of reporting about these
things would have been well established.
And the woman in charge of their human rights policy told me that, in fact,
the Australian act had forced them to do their reporting and take this
much more seriously, and it had changed their systems.
I'm talking about one of the largest companies in the world.
And so it was a really interesting discussion.
I think
it has raised awareness. It has driven some
changes inside companies, and the best companies in Australia are doing it
very wellIt drops away to people
basically taking the Mickey, and they're not reporting
or giving you an AI version that's very low standard.
So,
it's why we're looking at the question,
and I think it's broadly accepted now that the government will move on
introducing a penalty for non-reporting.
Because without it, I think you
find
people just don't play the game seriously.
In my point of view,
having a law that's voluntary doesn't make a lot of sense.
It's either a law or it isn't. And
so I think that's a change we'll make very shortly.
But look, the reporting has changed the way people operate inside
the systems. It's brought accountability to the issues of labor rights,
and it's also
made companies, if you like,
much more conscious of their exposures
in this regard. And the interesting thing that I found is
that board directors now are very literate on the subject.
They do take it seriously. There are a lot of meetings with boards,
and they are onto it because they now know they're held accountable for these
things in a way that they haven't been in the past.
In terms of the New South Wales committee, I think that's proved very effective.
In New South Wales, they went to quite a regulatory system over
their public sector as well, so there's an extra element in New South
Wales. But to be frank, it's also one of the areas of Australia where
you find more exploitation and more cases of modern slavery.
So they were a leader, if you like, in terms of
Australia. The committee is useful.
I think it
keeps issues at the forefront.
Federally, we had a
special select committee when we formed the act, which
drove a lot of the change, a lot of the debate.
And as a result of their report, effectively, that convinced the then
Prime Minister, Scott Morrison,
a Liberal and National Party government, to move on that issue then,
and then it received cross-party support in the Australian
Parliament. And the major amendment, which was creating my office
again, received total cross-party support in the Parliament.
So there's been that buildup of commitment and a buildup of
cross-party, where this issue hasn't been treated in a
partisan way at all, which I think has really allowed us to develop
the system
in a very positive way.
Great. Thank you. Greg, did you want to go back to your next question?
Yes, please. Chris, can I just get your thoughts on thresholds?
With the experience that you've had, where would you set them at, and would you
have them different for different industries?
That's not a sort of level of complexity that we've
seen argued for in Australia. I think
frankly, you don't want to set it too low.
If you want the system to work properly, you've got to take
companies on that track of developing the maturity
of their understanding of these issues internally, and how they
act, and then how they report. I don't like getting focused on reporting
too much, because it's about impact.
People tell me, "Oh, hey, what do you think of our report?" I say, "I don't really
care about your report. It's what you've done
inside the business to drive accountability around these
issues." The reporting is important, but I do try and take the stress
off. Some of them have spent a lot of time doing very big, glossy reports that
don't tell you much, but they've got lovely pictures and-
Mm
... lots of statements of goodwill.
But look, in terms of the thresholds, I think the reality
is it does require a level of systems inside a company.
It does rely on having the staffing
capability to make sure you do the job properly.
So we've been at the 100 million Australian dollars mark
since its institution.
I don't argue currently for us to lower that.
I think that's been about right. And
you've got to think very carefully about what you ask
of smaller companies, and one of the challenges in Australia has been
reporting requiring SMEs and others to
provide some accountability to those larger companies.
So if you like, it has required smaller companies to participate in,
but not in such a major way as the larger companies
want to get some surety about their supply chain inside-
Right
... and the role of SMEs. So I think it's had an educative effect all
down the system-
Mm
... but without having the same level of onus of
activity on the smaller businesses.
Okay.
Chris, knowing what you know from your experience and now
going through the review, we've heard a lot from people about
broadening it and including more aspects.
Would you recommend keeping it tight to begin with and then building
on it as you learn?
In terms of the size of the business?
No, not at all. I mean the scope of the legislation.
What it includes-
Yeah
... how far you go with what definitions and
impact.
Look, I think there's an argument for this maturing
process.
Having said that, of course, there's 2 or 300 New Zealand companies already
reporting under the Australian Act.
No doubt some of them are reporting under the UK Act, and some of them may be
reporting under the Canadian Act.
So this is not new to a lot of the large companies, and certainly the
multinationals are
impacted more broadly.
I think
one of the things you need to think carefully about is the EU
Forced Labor Regulation coming in next year.
I think there'll be a lot more activity around forced labor
internationally. But for countries that export a lot to the EU,
this development's going to be quite important, and I think the Australian
companies are just coming to understand that.
So I think-I think you are going to have to mature at a
quicker rate than perhaps
you might have if you started back in 2018, when I was involved in the debate in
New Zealand then,
when I was working with Walk Free. But
I think you do have to allow for
phase-in and developing of maturity
when you drive towards
more accountability. But I would make strongly the case that
without penalties, you won't get progress.
I don't mean huge punitive penalties, but just that holding companies
accountable. And the other thing I'd say is, I think the due diligence
system is where the world's going, and if you take a step along
that path, it's a very good thing. It will be very helpful for New Zealand business
in the longer term, because they'll be held accountable around the world
for these supply chains in any event.
Thank you. And question from Grant McCallum.
Yeah, G day. Thanks. Just confirming, you touched on the whole
direct liability thing.
You just don't feel there's any real advantage
in having that quite specific in the act?
Are you finding that the companies are taking this seriously anyway without
boards, sorry, without that specific focus?
Look, I guess what I'm indicating, it hasn't been a big part of the debate in
Australia in recent times. There are a lot of people, particularly from
civil society, will argue that it's important.
At the moment, we've been focused purely on trying to make sure that there are some
penalties for non-reporting to try and get that level of compliance up.
We think there's 500 or more companies currently in Australia
who haven't reported who should've.
Now, some of them are in complex
corporate structures, so we're not quite sure what that looks like yet.
But,
as I say, it just hasn't been a big debate.
I think it's obviously a very useful accountability mechanism.
And if you look at some of the court cases in the UK, it's certainly
been a case where they're starting to hold directors
accountable. I suppose I'd say
for you to think about how does it fit in with New
Zealand's legal structures
in a domestic sense, and how other law impacts in that way.
But certainly, if you're asking are directors
taking it seriously in Australia, I'd say yes,
very much so. And
though I would say what happens in these things is that we've had a huge issue, for
instance, on sexual assault and
sexual discrimination inside the workplace in the last few years.
If you like, I think modern slavery dropped down the list a bit as
that became an issue that companies began to focus on appropriately much more
than they had in the past.
But I think what we'll see now is with the
President of the United States making these issues a
major issue in all their trade negotiations and in their punishment
of economies that he
argues are not at the appropriate level of accountability on forced
labor,
I think generally the issue's going to be at the forefront and the
force, if you...
I suppose from my point of view, I look at New Zealand and say, "What's New Zealand
most famous for, apart from the All Blacks?"
And that is the pure green, 100% pure,
the whole image of New Zealand. And I would've thought
you're a country,
I don't want to sound speaking out of turn, but you're a country who needs to be
pure and green on labor rights as well as on the provenance of your
sheep.
And it seems to me you've done a really good job on everything bar your labor
rights.
And
I think if I was a Kiwi, I
lived there for a couple of years as a kid, but I'm very
much an Australian.
I think it's quite important for brand New Zealand, to be honest.
Thank you. Very helpful.
Yeah, thank you.
Thank you very much, Chris. Look, if the committee has any further questions as we
go through the process, no doubt we'll reach out, but really appreciate
the written submission as well and being able to learn from what you're going
through in Australia. So thank you so much.
My pleasure. Hope the considerations go well.
Yes. Appreciate it.
Thank you very much.
Committee, we'll move into our private but full committee session, so we'll
see you over there in a minute